# The Hitchiker's Guide to Hjson
*(or, Hjson in Pavona)*

This document attempts to catalogue many of the uses of Hjson descriptions in this repo.

For this project, the medium of [Hjson](https://hjson.github.io/) (human JSON) has been chosen both for readability and for the ability to incorporate comments (unlike vanilla JSON).
For guidance on how to properly format Hjson according to Pavona standards, please consult the [Hjson style guide](../../style_guides/hjson_usage_style.md).

## With Comportability

A key part of maintaining the [standards of comportability](./README.md) is ensuring a common language through which varying tool flows and levels of hardware can exchange information, and one of the ways this is done is via metadata captured in Hjson.
It allows the tools to utilize a standardized set of hardware properties without needing to know every detail of what is in the source code.
This helps both with design flow automation as well as component integration.

The primary examples of Hjson files are:
* hardware specifications
  * IP block descriptions
  * top level module configurations
* template file metadata
  * template descriptions
  * IP template configurations
* DV infrastructure
  * design verification (DV) testplans
  * EDA flow configurations
* other (not comportability-related) configurations
  * vendored code descriptions
  * one-time programmable (OTP) controller memory maps
  * OTP controller image configurations
  * life cycle (LC) controller state encodings
  * RACL configurations
  * RACL mappings

### Implementation

The way schema implementation and validation is done in the repo is generally Python scripts, which capture the expectations of the tooling.

Generally, the scripts will read in Hjson data as a [Python dictionary](https://docs.python.org/3.10/library/stdtypes.html#mapping-types-dict) and recast values if applicable.

Sometimes, a given tool will have a script `validate.py` and/or hardware-specific scripts that perform type checking and schema validation.
`util/<tool>/validate.py` and `util/<tool>/<hardware_object_type>.py` will often contain a series of Python dictionaries named `<schema>_<required/optional/added>` or `<REQUIRED/OPTIONAL/ADDED>_FIELDS` mapping a given Hjson field/key to its value type (see [`val_types`](../../../../util/reggen/validate.py)) and description.
If the name of the list specified "required", the field is a required field and will cause errors if not present in the Hjson; if it "optional", the field is optional; if "added", the field should not be present in the original Hjson but will be inserted into an autogenerated copy of the original Hjson by tooling.

`validate.py` also typically includes `check_<type>` functions to check for the correct data type for a given field, for not all anticipated data types are strictly JSON or Python data types.

For tools without a `validate.py` script, they tend to check schemas within the code themselves, expecting given dictionary keys and value types, sometimes calling on validation functions from other tools' libraries.

Tools can also carry out further metadata checking after the initial Hjson data import.
Commonly, tools will have Python classes which can be instantiated from the Hjson data and serve as internal representations of the hardware described.
These tools and their classes can have their own data checking functions; after all, simply having the right fields and the right data types does not imply that the hardware description is completely logically valid.

For example, topgen makes use of a [`check_alerts`](../../../../util/topgen/validate.py) function to ensure that, for a given top configuration, one of the alert handlers is specified as the default one and that the alerts are valid for each IP.

## Comportible Hardware Hjsons

Hjsons for hardware describe available interfaces to hardware as well as certain hardware behaviors that are important to communicate to tooling.
This ensures that top generation can consistently connect IP blocks together within an overall top module.

### IP Block Descriptions

IP block descriptions are central to comportability and discussed in much more depth in [the main comportability documentation](./README.md).
Said documentation includes descriptions of the schema for IP Hjsons.

An important field in the schema is the register list of a given IP.
The register list format is discussed more in depth in the [documentation for the register tool](../../../../util/reggen/README.md).

#### Source

The schema for IP block descriptions can be found in the file [`util/reggen/validate.py`](../../../../util/reggen/validate.py).

IP description Hjsons are conventionally located under `hw/ip/<ip_block>/data/<ip_block>.hjson`.

Additionally, looking at the register tool's [representation of hardware in Python](../../../../util/reggen) (eg., object model for an IP block in `ip_block.py`, for a memory window in `window.py`, for an intermodule signal in `inter_signal.py`) can be very helpful in understanding the information that tooling keeps track of when handling IP blocks and their registers.

### Top Level Module Configurations

Top level configurations are key to composing top levels using topgen.
Top config Hjsons both delineate information about the overall top as well as the module interfaces within them.
In addition to an overall top configuration Hjson, topgen also requires the input of a seed configuration file.

The top config and seed config schemas are discussed in-depth in the [documentation for topgen](../../../../util/topgen/README.md).

#### Source

The schema for top descriptions can be found in the file [`util/topgen/validate.py`](../../../../util/topgen/validate.py).

Typical top configuration Hjsons can be found under `hw/top_<topname>/data/top_<topname>.hjson`.

#### Generated Top Level Hjsons

Topgen will also generate a number of Hjsons which should not be modified.
However, these files may be useful when trying to understand the top generation process and debug any unintended output results.
They derive from the original top configuration and seed configuration files and are found under `hw/top_<topname>/data/autogen/`.

These files include:
* the complete configuration (`top_<topname>.gen.hjson`)
* a top secrets file (`top_<topname>.secrets.<seed_mode>.gen.hjson`)
* outgoing alerts and interrupts descriptors (`outgoing_alerts_<alert_group>.hjson`, `outgoing_interrupts_<interrupt_group>.hjson`)

## Comportible Template File Hjsons

ACE supports a number of template files which are used by ipgen to generate flexibly-parametrized IP blocks.
These templates are most commonly used in the topgen flow, where topgen will first instantiate any IP templates before continuing with the rest of the module wiring.
Hjson metadata for these templates helps tooling understand which parameters may be configured and what values should be used to generate templates in a given setting.

### Template Descriptions

Template description files list the parameters available for configuration within a template and other information about handling these parameters.
They are discussed more in the [ipgen documentation](../../../../util/ipgen/README.md).

#### Source

The way the template descriptions are handled by ipgen can be found in [`util/ipgen/lib.py`](../../../../util/ipgen/lib.py).

IP template descriptions typically have a path `hw/ip_templates/<ip_block>/data/<ip_block>.tpldesc.hjson`.

### Template Configurations

IP configuration Hjsons can be created by ipgen once the templates have been generated into actual IPs.
They are the means in which parametrized IPs can convey which values they were instantiated with for which parameters, which can be helpful, for example, when generating compatible software.

IP configs are discussed in the [documentation for dtgen](../../../../util/dtgen/README.md), which uses them for creating device tables.

The IP configuration schema is as follows:
| Key           | Required | Type   | Description                                                                           |
| ------------- | -------- | ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| instance_name | required | string | Name of the generated IP instance.                                                    |
| param_values  | required | group  | Dictionary mapping parameters to their values in the form of `<param_name>: <value>`. |
| dtgen         | optional | group  | Dictionary listing the name and details of each dtgen-relevant parameter.             |

#### Source

The `IpConfig` Python class (which is instantiated from an Hjson dataset) can be found in [`util/ipgen/lib.py`](../../../../util/ipgen/lib.py).

IP configs are usually found as `hw/top_<topname>/ip_autogen/<ip_block>/data/top_<topname>_<ip_block>.ipconfig.hjson`.

## Comportable DV Hjsons

There are also two forms of Hjson which are central to DV.
The first is the testplan, which tracks DV progress and can import other testplans that are shared by all other comportable IPs.
The second is the EDA tool flow configuration file, which can call upon a variety of other tool flows in proper sequence to run DV tests (simulations, linting, etc.).

This ability to functionally import other Hjsons in this respect makes Pavona's DV tooling very powerful.
Common tests may be inherited by others to [avoid having to duplicate code](./README.md).

Feel free to refer to the [DVSim glossary](../../../../util/dvsim/doc/glossary.md) for explanations of any confusing terms regarding testplans and flow configurations.

### Testplans

DV testplans contain planned testpoints and functional coverage groups.
They are discussed in greater depth in the [DV methodology document](../../dv/methodology/README.md), and the DV testplan schema is delineated in the [Testplanner documentation](../../../../util/dvsim/doc/testplanner.md).

#### Source

Testplan internal representation and mechanics can be found in [`util/dvsim/Testplan.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/Testplan.py).
Other examples of testplans used in tooling can be found in [`util/dvsim/Testplanner.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/testplanner.py), [`util/dvsim/SimCfg.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/SimCfg.py), and [`util/testplantool/testplanlib/lib.py`](../../../../util/testplantool/testplanlib/lib.py).

The [testplantool](../../../../util/testplantool/README.md) is a tool specifically for altering and querying testplan information, and [its libraries](../../../../util/testplantool) also demonstrates the assumptions about testplan content (including the [testplantool's internal representation of testplans](../../../../util/testplantool/testplanlib/lib.py)).

### Flow Configurations

DVSim configuration files are a means of running various EDA flows simply using an Hjson specification.
The ability for configuration files to import other configuration files is part of what makes DVSim so powerful.

The [DVSim design document](../../../../util/dvsim/doc/design_doc.md) describes DVSim architecture and its flow configurations.

#### Source

The [`util/dvsim/CfgJson.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/CfgJson.py) DVSim script is mainly where configuration Hjsons are read in.
Flow configuration files are mainly imported into DVSim using the `make_cfg` function in [`util/dvsim/CfgFactory.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/CfgFactory.py).

In addition, [DVSim arguments](../../../../util/dvsim/dvsim.py) can supplement or override Hjson settings.

The source code for each of the flow configuration classes can be found under `util/dvsim`: [`FlowCfg.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/FlowCfg.py), [`OneShotCfg.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/OneShotCfg.py), [`FormalCfg.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/FormalCfg.py), [`LintCfg.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/LintCfg.py), [`CdcCfg.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/CdcCfg.py), [`RdcCfg.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/RdcCfg.py), [`SynCfg.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/SynCfg.py), [`SimCfg.py`](../../../../util/dvsim/SimCfg.py).

For examples of flow configuration Hjsons, it is recommended you refer to the flows already available within Pavona:
* [`hw/lint/tools/dvsim`](../../../../hw/lint/tools/dvsim)
* [`hw/cdc/tools/dvsim`](../../../../hw/cdc/tools/dvsim)
* [`hw/rdc/tools/dvsim`](../../../../hw/rdc/tools/dvsim)
* [`hw/syn/tools/dvsim`](../../../../hw/syn/tools/dvsim)
* [`hw/dv/tools/dvsim`](../../../../hw/dv/tools/dvsim)
* Any of the IP- or top-specific `*_sim_cfg.hjson` files (found under `hw/ip/<ip_block>/dv` or under `hw/top_<topname>/dv`)
* Any of the IP-specific `*_syn_cfg.hjson` files (found under `hw/ip/<ip_block>/syn`)

## Beyond Comportability

While Hjson files are useful for implementing comportability, their usage need not be limited to comportable applications, and comportability as an abstract standard need not rely only on Hjson for capturing information.

It is important to note that the fact that Hjson is such a useful way of conveying information across tools means that it is also a keystone to making Pavona as flexible and useful as possible.
Other parts of this repo also leverage Hjson, and understanding these additional schemas can be very helpful when designing systems using Pavona tooling.

### Vendored Code

Both hardware and software code from other sources can be vendored into this repo.
To be compatible with the Pavona vendor tool, the vendored-in code must be accompanied by a vendor description file.

Refer to the [vendor tool documentation](../../../../util/doc/vendor.md) for the vendor description schema and usage.
When contributing to Pavona, there is a guide on [how to vendor in hardware](../vendor.md).

#### Source

Vendoring in code is done by [`util/vendor.py`](../../../../util/vendor.py).

For examples, see the already-vendored code in this repo under [`hw/vendor`](../../../../hw/vendor) and [`sw/vendor`](../../../../sw/vendor).

### Memory Maps, State Encodings, and Software Images

Part of design tooling includes generation of [OTP controller](../../../../hw/ip_templates/otp_ctrl/README.md.tpl) memory maps, [life cycle controller](../../../../hw/ip/lc_ctrl/README.md) state encodings, and OTP preload image collateral from Hjson descriptions.
Refer to the [design-related tooling documentation](../../../../util/design/README.md) for more information on these tools, their outputs, and related Hjson schemas.

#### Source

OTP memory map Hjsons are consumed by [`util/design/gen-otp-mmap.py`](../../../../util/design/gen-otp-mmap.py), which also calls upon [`util/design/lib/OtpMemMap.py`](../../../../util/design/lib/OtpMemMap.py).
Good examples of these can be found in the repo's top directories under `hw/top_<topname>/data/otp/otp_ctrl_mmap.hjson`.

Life cycle state Hjsons are inputs to [`util/design/gen-lc-state-enc.py`](../../../../util/design/gen-lc-state-enc.py), which uses [`util/design/lib/LcStEnc.py`](../../../../util/design/lib/LcStEnc.py).
[`hw/ip/lc_ctrl/data/lc_ctrl_state.hjson`](../../../../hw/ip/lc_ctrl/data/lc_ctrl_state.hjson) serves as a good reference.

OTP image configurations are used in [`util/design/gen-otp-img.py`](../../../../util/design/gen-otp-img.py) and [`util/design/lib/OtpMemImg.py`](../../../../util/design/lib/OtpMemImg.py).
Examples include `hw/top_<topname>/data/otp/otp_ctrl_img_*.hjson`.

### RACL Configurations and Mappings

The raclgen tool generates register access control list collateral and gathers information from RACL configuration Hjsons and optionally RACL mapping Hjsons.
The schemas for these two types of Hjson are elaborated upon in the [RACL overview](../racl/README.md).

#### Source

All RACL schemas can be found in [`util/raclgen/lib.py`](../../../../util/raclgen/lib.py).
These files are handled by [`util/raclgen.py`](../../../../util/raclgen.py).
